[v1] torch.compile integration explanation (#14437)
vllm-project/vllm: docs/source/design/v1/torch_compile.md

# vLLM's `torch.compile` integration

In vLLM's V1 architecture, `torch.compile` is enabled by default and is a critical part of the framework. This document gives a simple walk-through example to show how to understand the `torch.compile` usage.

Throughout the example, we will run a common Llama model using v1, and turn on debug level logging to show all the details. The command to be used is `VLLM_USE_V1=1 VLLM_LOGGING_LEVEL=DEBUG vllm serve meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B`.

## Compilation Cache

In the very verbose logs, we can see:

```
INFO 03-07 03:06:55 [backends.py:409] Using cache directory: ~/.cache/vllm/torch_compile_cache/1517964802/rank_0_0 for vLLM's torch.compile
```

> vLLM will take all the available factors into consideration, and decide a directory to store all the compilation artifact. This means, you can directly copy the whole `~/.cache/vllm/torch_compile_cache` directory in your deployment scenario to save a great amount of compilation time, and hence accelerating the starting time of the vLLM instance.

Reviewer: nit: May be add one sentence saying that we will explain how the compiled cache is hashed in the next section.

Author: added in [62c0ee3](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/14437/commits/62c0ee3a8b8242ce241f8d6367669861efdb531b)

```
DEBUG 03-07 03:52:37 [backends.py:134] store the 0-th graph for shape None from inductor via handle ('fpegyiq3v3wzjzphd45wkflpabggdbjpylgr7tta4hj6uplstsiw', '~/.cache/vllm/torch_compile_cache/1517964802/rank_0_0/inductor_cache/iw/ciwzrk3ittdqatuzwonnajywvno3llvjcs2vfdldzwzozn3zi3iy.py')
DEBUG 03-07 03:52:39 [backends.py:134] store the 1-th graph for shape None from inductor via handle ('f7fmlodmf3h3by5iiu2c4zarwoxbg4eytwr3ujdd2jphl4pospfd', '~/.cache/vllm/torch_compile_cache/1517964802/rank_0_0/inductor_cache/ly/clyfzxldfsj7ehaluis2mca2omqka4r7mgcedlf6xfjh645nw6k2.py')
...
DEBUG 03-07 03:52:45 [backends.py:134] store the 15-th graph for shape None from inductor via handle ('f7fmlodmf3h3by5iiu2c4zarwoxbg4eytwr3ujdd2jphl4pospfd', '~/.cache/vllm/torch_compile_cache/1517964802/rank_0_0/inductor_cache/ly/clyfzxldfsj7ehaluis2mca2omqka4r7mgcedlf6xfjh645nw6k2.py')
DEBUG 03-07 03:52:45 [backends.py:134] store the 16-th graph for shape None from inductor via handle ('fvj3ccoi7m34f3dnr4itmu55mmun44l5xymwhrjlwisylsk7q6jy', '~/.cache/vllm/torch_compile_cache/1517964802/rank_0_0/inductor_cache/tf/ctfftkglj7b4lcttq5cymx6cew372uoauupqn6ldsvpiucavqcjc.py')
```

> This means, the first piece of computation graph, with shape `None` (for symbolic shape), is compiled by Inductor, with a key `fpegyiq3v3wzjzphd45wkflpabggdbjpylgr7tta4hj6uplstsiw`, and the compiled kernel is stored in  `~/.cache/vllm/torch_compile_cache/1517964802/rank_0_0/inductor_cache/iw/ciwzrk3ittdqatuzwonnajywvno3llvjcs2vfdldzwzozn3zi3iy.py`. You can open the file to see what is the code Inductor finally runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means the first piece of computation graph (with shape `None` for symbolic shape) is compiled by Inductor (with a key `fpegyiq3v3wzjzphd45wkflpabggdbjpylgr7tta4hj6uplstsiw`). The compiled kernel is stored in  `~/.cache/vllm/torch_compile_cache/1517964802/rank_0_0/inductor_cache/iw/ciwzrk3ittdqatuzwonnajywvno3llvjcs2vfdldzwzozn3zi3iy.py`. You can open the file to see what is the code Inductor finally runs.
```

Author: fixed in [24aa01b](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/14437/commits/24aa01b960eef3dfb8d6b6a17d3b5a166bfa25d4)

  triton_mm_1 0.0203 ms 64.2% ACC_TYPE='tl.float32', ALLOW_TF32=False, BLOCK_K=128, BLOCK_M=16, BLOCK_N=32, B_PROLOGUE_CAST_TYPE=None, EVEN_K=True, GROUP_M=8, num_stages=2, num_warps=2
  triton_mm_7 0.0203 ms 64.1% ACC_TYPE='tl.float32', ALLOW_TF32=False, BLOCK_K=64, BLOCK_M=16, BLOCK_N=64, B_PROLOGUE_CAST_TYPE=None, EVEN_K=True, GROUP_M=8, num_stages=3, num_warps=4
  triton_mm_2 0.0208 ms 62.5% ACC_TYPE='tl.float32', ALLOW_TF32=False, BLOCK_K=32, BLOCK_M=16, BLOCK_N=64, B_PROLOGUE_CAST_TYPE=None, EVEN_K=True, GROUP_M=8, num_stages=5, num_warps=4
  triton_mm_11 0.0215 ms 60.5% ACC_TYPE='tl.float32', ALLOW_TF32=False, BLOCK_K=64, BLOCK_M=16, BLOCK_N=128, B_PROLOGUE_CAST_TYPE=None, EVEN_K=True, GROUP_M=8, num_stages=3, num_warps=4
SingleProcess AUTOTUNE benchmarking takes 2.0428 seconds and 7.5727 seconds precompiling
```

It means, for a matrix multiplication with shape `8x2048x3072`, `torch.compile` tries triton template with various configs, and it is much faster than the default code (which dispatches to cublas library).

> Unfortunately, because auto-tuning takes quite a long time (even though it can be cached for later use), for the sake of user-friendliness, we turn it off by default. If you want to have max performance, it is recommended to try it, by compiling specific shapes.

Author: auto-tuning is enabled when you add specific sizes to compile, it's in the doc `--compilation_config "{'compile_sizes': [1, 2, 4, 8]}"`

caching is enabed by default, and can be disabled by `export VLLM_DISABLE_COMPILE_CACHE=1` .  I will update the documentation for how to disable the caching later.

> Unfortunately, because auto-tuning takes quite a long time (even though it can be cached for later use), for the sake of user-friendliness, we turn it off by default. If you want to have max performance, it is recommended to try it, by compiling specific shapes.

Reviewer: Also it'd better to give a rough idea about how long it usually takes (e.g. few minutes, about an hour, etc).

## Cudagraph Capture

> vLLM's V1 architecture uses piecewise cudagraph. The full computation graph is split as mentioned above, and we only capture the cudagraph for the piece of graph between attention operations (including the first graph before any attention operation, and the last graph after all the attention operation). This is based on the common observation, that computation between attention are usually token-wise, and easy to deal with for cudagraph, while the attention operation is non-trival to be cudagraph compatible. By running the attention operation in eager mode, we keep the flexibility of the attention operation, while the rest operations run in cudagraph mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vLLM's V1 architecture uses piecewise cudagraph. The full computation graph is split as mentioned above, and we only capture the cudagraph for the piece of graph between attention operations (including the first graph before any attention operation, and the last graph after all the attention operation). This is based on a common observation: computation between attentions are usually token-wise and easy to deal with for cudagraph; while the attention operation is non-trival to be cudagraph compatible. Thus, by running the attention operation in eager mode while the rest operations in cudagraph, we keep the flexibility of the attention operation.
```

Author: fixed in [8e32aa6](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/14437/commits/8e32aa66307a1cb6020e7fbe27cc8a9f402ae71d)

The piecewise cudagraph also has fine-grained memory management. The purpose is to only exclude the attention kernel from cudagraph, while keeping all the rest modules and the memory allocation operations in the cudagraph. This is why the attention operation in V1 has the output tensor as the input of the attention.

The cudagraphs are captured and managed by the compiler backend, and replayed when the batch size has corresponding cudagraph captured. The caller of the model (model runner) only needs to make sure it manages the input buffers correctly. All of the intermediate buffers are managed automatically by the compiler backend.

By default, vLLM will try to determine a set of sizes to capture cudagraph. You can also override it using the config `cudagraph_capture_sizes`:

`VLLM_USE_V1=1 vllm serve meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B --compilation_config "{'cudagraph_capture_sizes': [1, 2, 4, 8]}"`

> Then it will only capture cudagraph for the specified sizes. It can be useful to have fine-grained control over the cudagraph capture.

Reviewer: At the end of the doc we could point to the API reference for compilation configuration.

Author: I might write more API docs later, when I have time.

Reviewer: That's fine. We could just say the detailed API reference TBA

Author: I prefer to add it later with a detailed API doc.
